<!-- Filename: Installing_Joomla_on_a_rented_web_server / Display title: Installing Joomla on a rented web server -->

Note: This tutorials is targeted for non-expert audience, if you need
more detailed and advanced information go to the
<a href="https://docs.joomla.org/Developers" class="mw-redirect"
title="Developers">Developers page</a>.

### Requirement

Fist thing to do is to check if your web server meets the Joomla
technical requirements, visits
<a href="http://www.joomla.org/technical-requirements.html"
class="external text" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">this
page</a> so see the Joomla requirements table.

If you are not a tech person, the easiest way to check if Joomla is
compatible with the server you own is to mail the support guys of your
hosting company with something like this.

    Good day sirs 

    I would like to know if the server I rented is capable 
    of run a Joomla installation smoothly, this is the 
    Joomla Requirement page:

    http://www.joomla.org/technical-requirements.html

    Thanks for your help, have a nice day

Event the cheapest web host providers normally answer this kind of
support questions in less than 3 hours, so relax and wait for the
answer.

Now if you are a computer enthusiast and you got in your personal
computer a local web server using XAMP, LAMPP or any other and this
server is up to date, you can be 99% sure Joomla will run just fine on
it just give it a try to see yourself.

### Installation on rented servers

There is several ways to install a Joomla copy on a rented web server
but the methods and procedures may vary depending on the server provider
it configurations and limitations, for example, some web server
providers give you the option to do the famous "one click install" it
consist on press a button and your web server provider will run an
automated script to install a copy of Joomla in your rented web server,
if you have hard time finding this options just send a mail to the
support guys of your server provider with something like this:

    Good day sirs 

    I would like to know if your guys have the 
    "one click install" option to automatically 
    install a pre-configured copy of Joomla in 
    the server I rented.

    Thanks for your help, have a nice day.

As mentioned before some web server providers have this option and
others not, and be aware that some lazy web server providers may have a
one click installation option BUT... using a very old and outdated
Joomla version.

Having this clear let's say you want to install a Joomla copy manually
on your rented web server, if so
