<!-- Filename: Using_Keywords / Display title: Schlüsselwörter verwenden -->

### Schlüsselwörter Strategie

Before you even begin creating your Joomla site it is important to carry
out a keyword research project to identify what the core keywords will
be for your site, and associated keywords which complement or are
relevant to the core keywords.

The reason for this is that keywords should be at the centre of your
website design - your site structure (content categories, product
groupings and so forth), menu items, content articles and so on should
all be optimised to make the best use of your core and associated
keywords.

As a basic guideline, ask yourself (or your client) the following
questions:

1.  Was sind die Top 20-Schlüsselwörter?
2.  Welche weiteren passenden Wörter und Phrasen sind wichtig?
3.  Welche Fragen stellen Besucher, die die Website beantwortet?
4.  Was ist die wichtigste Seite der Website (das muß nicht die
    Startseite sein, häufiger sind es Seiten mit spezifischen
    Informationen)

### Meta Schlüsselwörter

The meta keyword tag found in the head of most Web documents has little
effect for Google, Bing and many of the other larger search engines any
more, however some search engines such as Yahoo do still make use of the
meta tags as part of their algorithm - so again this is something you
should still continue to provide.

While it is true that many search engines do not use the information,
they do still read the information - so make sure that your tags are
relevant and descriptive of the content. As a rule of thumb, your main
keywords should feature in your title, meta description, meta keywords
and within the first few paragraphs of the content. If they don't, then
consider whether you need to include them as keywords.

Schlüsselwörter müssen mittels Komma getrennt sein (zum Beispiel
„Katzen, Hunde, Tiere“), sie können in Groß- oder Kleinbuchstaben
eingegeben sein (z.B. „KATZE“ wird mit „katze“ oder „Katze“
übereinstimmen). Schlüsselwörter können für unterschiedliche Aufgaben
verwendet werden:

1.  Um Suchmaschinen und anderen Systemen bei der Klassifizierung des
    Beitragsinhalts zu helfen.
2.  In Kombination mit Banner-Tags, um bestimmte Banner anzuzeigen, die
    auf dem Inhalt des Beitrags aufbauen. Angenommen, ein Banner mit
    einer Anzeige für Hundeprodukte und ein zweiter Banner für
    Katzenprodukte sind vorhanden. So kann ein Banner für Ihren Hund
    angezeigt werden, wenn ein Benutzer einen Hunde-bezogenen Beitrag
    betrachtet, während ein Banner für Katzen mit einem Beitrag für
    Katzen angezeigt wird. Das funktioniert so:
    - Die Schlüsselwörter "hund" und "katze" dem passenden Beitrag
      hinzufügen.
    - Die Schlagwörter "Hund" und "Katze" zu den entsprechenden Bannern
      auf der Seite [Banner:
      Bearbeiten](https://docs.joomla.org/Help4.x:Banners:_Edit/de "Special:MyLanguage/Help4.x:Banners: Edit/de")
      hinzufügen.
    - Im Banner-Modul den Parameter 'Nach Schlüsselwort suchen' auf "Ja"
      setzen [Site Modul:
      Banner](https://docs.joomla.org/Help4.x:Site_Modules:_Banners/de "Special:MyLanguage/Help4.x:Site Modules: Banners/de").
3.  Nur für Beiträge in Kombination mit dem Modul ['Beiträge -
    Verwandte'](https://docs.joomla.org/Help4.x:Site_Modules:_Articles_-_Related/de "Special:MyLanguage/Help4.x:Site Modules: Articles - Related/de")
    , zur Anzeige von Beiträgen, die mindestens ein Schlüsselwort
    gemeinsam haben. Wenn der aktuell angezeigte Beitrag zum Beispiel
    die Schlüsselwörter „Katzen, Hunde, Affen“ enthält, werden alle
    anderen Beiträge mit mindestens einem dieser Schlüsselwörter im
    Modul 'Beiträge - Verwandte' angezeigt.

### Keyword Density

Keyword density used to be the buzz word of the Search Engine
Optimisation (SEO) world, however it has become less important since
search engines moved their focus away from meta keywords in their
ranking algorithms.

At a basic level, keyword density is a way of explaining the number of
times a word is repeated in the readable content of a page. If you have
ten readable words and one word is a keyword the density of that keyword
would be 10%. If you have 100 words and one of them is a keyword you now
have a density of 1%.

It is recommended that content pages should try to ensure that keyword
density falls somewhere between 3.5-7% as this is considered to be
'readable' without appearing 'spammy'. There are many online tools which
will analyse your website to provide estimated keyword densities for
your pages.

### Guidelines on keyword use

It is important to keep at the forefront of your mind that any content
on your website should first and foremost be written for human beings,
not for search engine 'bots'. When writing an article, for example,
ensure that when you read the text back to yourself it makes grammatical
sense to include the keywords you are using in the places they have been
used. If it sounds strange or odd, or if you've repeated words
un-necessarily, adjust your text.

Keywords can (and should) be used in your title, alias, URL, meta
description, meta keywords and within the content itself, but you should
not try to 'stuff' your content full of keywords - it should always be
pass the 'readability' test above.

Content that does not make sense and/or is full of keywords for the sole
purpose of raising the keyword density to a high level could cause your
site to be penalised by search engines, which could result in a drop in
search ranking position and potentially de-listing of the page in
question.

It is actually quite to write an article that someone will enjoy reading
or find usable at the same time as having a keyword density over 7%, so
it should be obvious if your content falls into this category of
potentially spammy material.

This section has a keyword density on the term “keyword” of 1.79% and on
the term “keywords” of 2.05%. The combined density is approximately
3.8%. You can see how deliberate you would have to be to stuff a site
greater than 7%!

### How to add meta keywords to your site

- 

Add your core keywords to your Global Configuration \> Site \> Global
site meta keywords if you wish to use global metadata

- 

Add specific meta keywords (which may include core keywords) to articles
using the metadata information (make sure the keywords listed here are
in the content of the article, title, alias and meta description also)

- 

Adding the data does not harm your rankings in search engines, and may
help you in Yahoo, and meta crawlers

- 

Do not add more than 25 words in the meta data

- 

Ensure that you separate words and phrases with a comma

- 

Do not repeat keywords
