<!-- Filename: What_has_the_copyright_of_Joomla!%3F / Display title: What has the copyright of Joomla!? -->

The Joomla! project does not aggregate the copyrights of its code
contributors. No contributor is required to transfer his/her copyright
to Joomla! and each individual contribution will forever remain in the
ownership of its author. This also applies to translations of the
Installation language set as these alone are included in the core
release of Joomla!.

Open Source Matters Inc., a not-for-profit organisation, holds the
Joomla! project's assets and represents Joomla!'s legal matters. Joomla!
project claims copyright over the total aggregated creation which is the
CMS and framework. This copyright is held by Open Source Matters Inc.
This is why each file in the release is marked "Copyright - Open Source
Matters Inc." This does not violate the copyright and ownership of the
individual contributions. These always remain the authors' property.
Attributions of the copyrights of contributors and other included code
elements is detailed in the main copyright file in the root directory of
the Joomla! installation. As the contributors do not transfer copyright
they instead declare that their code contributions are licensed to Open
Source Matters Inc. in a limited and non-exclusive fashion. Limited
meaning that Open Source Matters Inc. may only use their contribution if
it is released under GNU/GPL for the entire Joomla! CMS (or GNU/LGPL in
the specific case of the Joomla! Framework Libraries). Non-exclusive
meaning that the contributors are free to do whatever they wish with
their own creations including using it for their own releases under any
licence they wish (including commercial).
