<!-- Filename: J4.x:Getting_Started:_Adding_an_Article / Display title: Erste Schritte: Einen Beitrag hinzufügen -->

## Einführung

You have installed Joomla! but don't have a clue what to do next! Let us
assume you are looking at the Home Dashboard. Select the **Home
Dashboard** item in the **Administrator** menu just to be sure.

There are several ways to create a new article:

- Select the **+** icon adjacent to Articles in the Home Dashboard Site
  panel.
- Expand the Content menu and select the **+** button adjacent to
  Articles there.
- In either location select the **Articles** item and in the Articles
  list screen select the **New** button the Toolbar.

## The Toolbar

On almost every page, immediately beneath the title bar, is a bar
containing action buttons. This is known as the Toolbar. The buttons
differ from page to page and sometimes are inactive, appearing grey,
until an item is selected in the list of items. Example, containing New,
Action, Options and Help buttons:

<img
src="https://docs.joomla.org/images/thumb/9/9c/J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png/800px-J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png"
class="thumbborder" decoding="async"
srcset="https://docs.joomla.org/images/thumb/9/9c/J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png/1200px-J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png 1.5x, https://docs.joomla.org/images/9/9c/J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png 2x"
data-file-width="1440" data-file-height="356" width="800" height="198"
alt="J4.x-getting-started-toolbar-screenshot-en.png" />

## The Articles Edit Page

There are a bewildering number of form fields in the Edit page but all
but except two have sensible defaults that you can forget about for now.
The fields to fill in:

- **Title.** This is compulsory and should be something short and
  simple.
- **Content** The article text. This is optional but it would not make
  much sense to have an article with no content. So start typing. If you
  just want something to try out copy the following paragraph:

*Aliquam lorem ante, dapibus in, viverra quis, feugiat a, tellus.
Phasellus viverra nulla ut metus varius laoreet. Quisque rutrum. Aenean
imperdiet. Etiam ultricies nisi vel augue. Curabitur ullamcorper
ultricies nisi. Nam eget dui. Etiam rhoncus. Maecenas tempus, tellus
eget condimentum rhoncus, sem quam semper libero, sit amet adipiscing
sem neque sed ipsum. Nam quam nunc, blandit vel, luctus pulvinar,
hendrerit id, lorem. Maecenas nec odio et ante tincidunt tempus. Donec
vitae sapien ut libero venenatis faucibus. Nullam quis ante. Etiam sit
amet orci eget eros faucibus tincidunt. Duis leo. Sed fringilla mauris
sit amet nibh.*

- **Featured.** To the right of the edit box (on laptop or bigger
  screens and below on smaller screens) there is a field to select to
  make this a Featured article. Select it and then select the **Save**
  button in the Toolbar.

## Site View

To see what it looks like you can select the Site view icon in the Title
bar. If the site view is already open just reload it.

<img
src="https://docs.joomla.org/images/thumb/e/ea/J4.x-getting-started-my-first-article-screenshot-en.png/800px-J4.x-getting-started-my-first-article-screenshot-en.png"
class="thumbborder" decoding="async"
srcset="https://docs.joomla.org/images/e/ea/J4.x-getting-started-my-first-article-screenshot-en.png 1.5x"
data-file-width="854" data-file-height="480" width="800" height="450"
alt="J4.x-getting-started-my-first-article-screenshot-en.png" />

Note the article metadata: the information between the Title and the
Content. You can configure what information appears and where it appears
with those other article form fields. Later...

## The Read More Break

If your article is several paragraphs long and you wish to show a number
of featured articles on the Home page of your website, you should insert
a Read More break after the first paragraph. If you click the Editor CMS
Content button you will find it at the bottom of the list. The break
appears as a horizontal dashed red line. Here is another paragraph of
test text to insert below the page break:

*Donec sodales sagittis magna. Sed consequat, leo eget bibendum sodales,
augue velit cursus nunc, quis gravida magna mi a libero. Fusce vulputate
eleifend sapien. Vestibulum purus quam, scelerisque ut, mollis sed,
nonummy id, metus. Nullam accumsan lorem in dui. Cras ultricies mi eu
turpis hendrerit fringilla. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus
orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; In ac dui quis mi
consectetuer lacinia. Nam pretium turpis et arcu. Duis arcu tortor,
suscipit eget, imperdiet nec, imperdiet iaculis, ipsum. Sed aliquam
ultrices mauris. Integer ante arcu, accumsan a, consectetuer eget,
posuere ut, mauris.*

The result is that only the text before the page break appears on the
Home page. Click the Article Title or the Read More button to see the
full article on its own.

And notice the Breadcrumbs!
