<!-- Filename: Linking_To_Other_Sites / Display title: Linking To Other Sites -->

## Linking to other sites

Building links to other websites has always been an important part of
search engine optimisation and is one of the most abused ways of
attempting to gain prominence in search listings. As a result, search
engines have cracked down on this kind of unnatural activity, heavily
penalising websites which try to artificially increase their search
engine rankings by building large volumes of reciprocal links with
websites over a short period of time. In an attempt to address this
problem, search engines regularly update their algorithms, and penalise
any sites they find to be operating outside their best practice
guidelines (See [Google
Updates](https://docs.joomla.org/Google_Updates "Special:MyLanguage/Google Updates")
for more information).

### Safe link-building

While best practice recommendations change frequently, the 'rule of
thumb' is to use common sense. Link building should be a natural
process, and the websites which you link to, or that link to your
website, should be related in some way to your site.

#### Anchor Text

Any links you have on your website which lead to an external resource
should clearly inform your visitors what they are linking to without
being spammy - for example [Joomla! Documentation
Project](https://docs.joomla.org/Main_Page "Main Page") would be a clear
indication that the link is directing people to the homepage of the
Joomla! Documentation Project. If the link were to be written as
[here](https://docs.joomla.org/Main_Page "Main Page") it is not so clear
what page you might be visiting - and as you haven't used any keywords
from the landing page, their site will not be getting the best benefit
from your link.

The words which you use within the hyperlink are known as the '**anchor
text'** - and ideally these should contain information about the page to
which you are linking, even better if these words feature in the URL as
well. An example where this is often done poorly on Joomla! websites is
where 'Read more' links display *Read More* rather than the title of the
article, in the hyperlinked text. Joomla 3.x and above has implemented
the ability to include the article title in the read more tag, which is
an improvement.

Another common anchor text which doesn't help the user or search engine
'bots' is for content to only include a link on the word *here* - this
doesn't tell you (or search engine 'bots') anything about the content on
the page they are being directed to, unless they have read and
understood the surrounding text. Using a well-written anchor text also
gives the person visiting your site confidence in the link they are
clicking - they know what to expect when visiting the link, so it may be
more likely that they do so.

This is true for both internal links (if you're linking to another page
or area on your website) and also on external links to other sites.

### A word of warning

It is important to note that with recent updates to [Google's
algorithms](https://docs.joomla.org/Google_Updates "Special:MyLanguage/Google Updates")
(named Panda, and more recently Penguin), sites with unnatural linking
profiles may be down-ranked in search engine positions. One of the main
factors in the Penguin update targeted websites which had a large amount
of its traffic coming from keyword-stuffed anchor text on hyperlinks
from low-value websites. Keep your links relevant, appropriate and
relating to what you are linking to.

Where possible, it's also wise to regularly check that your links are
still valid. The user experience is tainted somewhat if 50% of the links
on your site result in a *404 - Page Not Found* error. There are tools
available online which allow you to check broken links from your site -
it is sensible to check this occasionally and correct any links which no
longer work.

In short, use links appropriately, and build links to your site in an
organic way. Natural link building adds value to your website for your
visitors, and brings visitors to your site who are interested in your
content. The user experience is improved greatly when you link to any
article you may be referencing (whether internal or external), and the
Search Engines generally recognise this and favour it.
