<!-- Filename: Listing_a_user_on_a_contacts_page / Display title: Listing a user on a contacts page -->

## Adding Contacts to the Contact Page

Adding users to the Joomla contact page is not hard at all.

First log in to your Administration (Backend). Go to
**Components **→** Contacts **→** Categories**

By default, Joomla shows a category called contacts. This can be
updated, used, or you can create your own category.

To create a new category, click on the *New* button. An editing page
will open. Name the category in the title field. The alias field is the
computer programming name which should not include any spaces. The alias
will not show to the user, only the title. Click *Yes* on the published
field. Add an image, align it right or left, and even add a description
which will only show up for Backend users. Click *Save* and you have
created a category for your new users.

## Create a New User

Go back to your *main category* page, and you will be able to choose
from category or contact. Since you have already added your category,
you will now choose contact. There is a default contact there already,
with the name of name. It is easy to just update this item, by clicking
on it, and updating the information that is already set. For purposes of
this tutorial, we are going to create a new contact from scratch.

Click on *New*. This will open an editing window where you can add the
contact name, alias for the computer, and the rest of the left side of
the window is your custom information.

On the right side of the window we see several parameters. Under contact
parameters, fill out the address, and other contact information. At the
end you will see an option for vCard. This is a handy digital business
card that will allow visitors to download a preformatted vCard of the
contact. You can find out more about vCards at
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VCard" class="external text"
target="_blank" rel="nofollow noreferrer noopener">Wikipedia</a>.

Under advanced parameters, choose from different icons. If you want
custom icons, add them into the media folder under icons. They will be
available here to insert into your contact.

Under Email Parameters, edit the contact form that will be on the
contact page for the visitor to use to contact you. You can choose from
the subject that comes to you. Also you can choose from banned words,
subjects, and so on that are sent to you.

With a little effort, the contact capabilities in Joomla can accomplish
a lot.
