<!-- Filename: Entering_search_engine_meta-data / Display title: Entering search engine meta-data -->

Metadata is information about the website in the header portion of the
web page. This information is used by search engines to determine the
relevance of the page to the search request it is processing. This data
is collected by various means by search engines such as Google, Yahoo
and Bing. The following is a partial list of things to consider when
building a website.

## Title Tags

Well-constructed title tags contain the main keyword for the page,
followed by a brief description of the page content. It will be less
than 65 characters and avoid using stop words such as: *a*, *if*, *the*,
*then*, *and*, *an*, *to*. Your title tag should also be limited to the
use of alphanumeric characters, hyphens, and commas.

## Description Tags

Good description tags contain information about the page's content and
persuade search engine users to visit your web site. They should be
between 25 and 35 words in length.

## Heading Tags

Each page of your site should use at least the *H1* heading tag for the
search engines that examine it when crawling your site.

## Page Content

Pages should have between 300 and 700 words of descriptive content that
contains relevant keywords.

## Proper Navigation

Each page of your site should contain links to all other pages so search
engine spiders can find every page. This is a critical step for the
proper indexing and page rank distribution of your site.

## Proper Sitemap

It's important to use two site maps for your websiteâ€”an XML version and
a static version. The XML table protocol is explained in detail on
<a href="https://www.sitemaps.org/" class="external text"
target="_blank" rel="nofollow noreferrer noopener">sitemaps.org</a>. The
static version should sit on a static HTML page and contain links to all
pages of your site.

## Controlled Crawling

It's important that search engine spiders find your [Robots.txt
file](https://docs.joomla.org/Robots.txt_file "Robots.txt file") that
guides spiders to pages and directories you want crawled and denies them
entry to areas that are off limits.

## Duplicate Content/Tags

Because search engines treat websites as a grouping of pages and not a
single entity, each page on your site should be unique so that the tags
and content differ between each page. Doing so increases the number of
pages that will rank.

## Word Density

Pages should contain 300 to 700 words of unique and descriptive content.
