<!-- Filename: J4.x:How_to_Archive_an_Article / Display title: How to Archive an Article -->

Joomla!  4.x **<span class="mw-content-ltr" lang="en" dir="ltr">How To  
Archive Articles</span>**

## Introduction

As your website content grows it is likely that some of that content
will need to be updated or replaced.

You might choose to unpublish these articles but you may have a
requirement to keep the original articles/s in a way that people can
still view them.

Joomla! makes archiving of articles a simple process by allowing you to
change the status of the article to **Archived**. A benefit of archiving
is that it makes content management easier and archiving is structured
by year.

This status based approach is a key part of Joomla’s ability to
effectively and efficiently manage content. Once archived, Joomla
provides methods to access and display the content.

## Archiving Articles

You can archive an article in several places, in the Article Manager, in
the Article itself or in the Article via it’s Menu Item.

### Archiving via the Article Manager

Once logged into Joomla go to the Article Manager via the Home Dashboard
or Sidebar Menu.

\[\[Image:j4.x_navigate_to_article_manager-en.png\|border\|500px\]\]

From the Article Manager click the checkbox for the article you want to
archive. Note that you can archive several articles at once.

Selecting one or more articles will enable the **Actions** dropdown
list.

From the **Actions** dropdown list choose **Archive**.

\[\[Image:j4.x_archive_from_article_manager-en.png\|border\|800px\]\]

The article/s will no longer appear in the *default* Article Manager
List view.

### Archiving Within an Article

When an article is open you can archive it by simply changing the
article's **Status**.

Click the **Status** dropdown icon.

Select **Archived**. **Save & Close** the article.

\[\[Image:j4.x_set_article_status_to_archived-en.png\|border\|800px\]\]

### From Within a Menu Item

This method only applies for articles that appear in a menu as a
**Single Article**.

With the Menu Item open, click the **Edit** button in the **Select
Article** field.

The article will be opened in a panel. Change the status of the article
to **Archived** as shown in the previous method above.

Click **Save & Close** then **Save & Close** the Menu Item.

## Viewing Archived Articles

Once articles have been archived, there are several ways to view them.

### To view from the backend

In the Article Manager click the **Filter Options** button then the
**Select Status** dropdown.

Choose **Archived**.

This will apply a filter to display all articles set with a status of
archived.

Return to the default article list view by clicking the **Clear**
button.

\[\[Image:j4.x_filter_article_list-en.png\|border\|800px\]\]

### To view from the frontend via a menu

There is a Menu Item type of **Articles \> Archived Article** that you
can use to create a link in your menu to archived articles.

[Further
Information](https://docs.joomla.org/J4.x:How_to_Create_a_Menu_Item_to_View_Archived_Articles "Special:MyLanguage/J4.x:How to Create a Menu Item to View Archived Articles")

### To view from the frontend via a module

There is a module type **Articles – Archived** that you can use to
display in a one of your website template module positions.

[Further
Information](https://docs.joomla.org/J4.x:How_to_Show_a_Calendar_Month_List_of_Archived_Articles_Using_a_Module "Special:MyLanguage/J4.x:How to Show a Calendar Month List of Archived Articles Using a Module")

## Un-archive Articles

To un-archive an article the same process applies - the status of the
article is changed from **Archived** to **Published**.

Follow the steps above at **Viewing Archived Articles \> To view from
the backend** to filter for archived articles. Select the relevant
article/s and change the status to **Published**.

## Quick Tips

Remember, archived articles are filtered from view in the Article
Manager. You must change the status filter to **Archived** to view them.

Archiving does not unpublish the article.

You can also archive articles from the frontend when logged in for
frontend editing.
